title = 'blagger - the meta post'
subtitle = '[it was inevitable](https://www.theolognion.com/programmer-starts-a-blog-doesnt-write-about-their-static-site-generator-setup-in-the-first-post/)'
tags = ['blagger', 'meta']
date = 2020-05-29
description = "dread it, run from it, meta still arrives"
::===::
So I don't like GitHub pages.

I mean, it's a nice, convient service, I suppose. If you don't care too much
about the exact way your site looks, it works pretty well, all things
considered.

But... I care. I *like* this awful, horrible, no-distinction-between-code-and-prose
stylesheet. I like how simple the CSS is and how nice the page looks.

Unfortunately, I also don't like writing HTML. It's 2020, I should be worrying
about making sure I have a mask on in public, not meticulously opening and
closing `<p>` tags. Markdown is nice, but beating Jekyll into producing a site
that looks like this is going to be hard...

So [I made my own generator.](https://github.com/c-x-berger/blagger)  
In hindsight, I should have taken the deal with Jekyll.

`blagger` is a Pure Rust app that is designed to turn Markdown + everthing else
into static HTML, ready to be served by GitHub pages. But How Does It Work?

Most of the heavy lifiting is done by two crates - [tinytemplate] and
[pulldown-cmark]. Serde helps too.

## the build process
When building a site, `blagger` (roughly) does the following:

1. Canonicalize all input and output paths. I really didn't want to think about
weird relative locations, so any relative paths are essentially eliminated.
This has the limitation that the given paths must *exist* at runtime, but we
can fairly easily create any output directories (and the input needs to exist
anyway...)
2. Get a list of every file in the input directory, and filter out any template
files.
3. Each input file lands in the output directory as follows:
   * Files with any extension other than `.md` or `.markdown` are directly
   copied to the output directory, with directory structure preserved.
   (`in/foo/file` becomes `out/foo/file`.)
   * Markdown files are compiled against the provided template, and the result
   written to `out` with the same directory preserving scheme. (If you're OK
   with sharing tag pages, you could build multiple blogs from one repo!)

### compiling a post
Currently, Markdown files are processed by a single input template. This file
must be a valid [tinytemplate] template. Some [information about the post and
other filters](https://github.com/c-x-berger/blagger#templating) is provided to
the template during rendering so it can actually, y'know, display the post.

The template is assumed to be HTML, in that `blagger` will write the output to
a `.html` file. (Again, directory structure is preserved as above, only the
extension changes.)

### tag pages
As of v0.1.3, `blagger` can generate tag pages from a template. See the [tag
templates][TAG_TEMPLATES.md] docs for more information - the TL;DR is that the
template is given a list of posts that you probably want to loop over in
rendering. Currently, they're in no particular order, but will probably be
sorted alphabetically by input filename (and will be better-sorted when I
bother to implement `Ord` in a later version.)

Tag pages still need work, so expect the interface to change out underneath you
without a major semver number. (If `mio` can do it so can I, right?)

## getting it on the hub
So here's a fun problem - GitHub pages doesn't let you use anything but Jekyll
for site generation. With GitHub Actions existing now, they could have stolen
[GitLab's system][gitlab-site], but in typical GitHub fashion, they kinda 
forgot about integrating with old features. Whoops.

To get around this, I have `blagger` output into a clone of my GitHub pages
repo, and push when I'm ready to publish. It's obviously far from ideal, but it
gets the job done. Blame Octocat.

## is it any good?
Yes. This blog uses it fine.

## what's coming?
RSS feeds and bugfixes, mostly.

[tinytemplate]: https://crates.io/crates/tinytemplate
[pulldown-cmark]: https://crates.io/crates/pulldown-cmark
[TAG_TEMPLATES.md]: https://github.com/c-x-berger/blagger/blob/master/TAG_TEMPLATES.md
[gitlab-site]: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/pages/getting_started_part_four.html#the-public-directory
