title = 'cross compiling rusty code'
subtitle = '<del>hi steven</del>'
tags = ['rust', 'arm', 'raspberry pi', 'cross compiler']
date = 2020-05-04
description = "this wasn't a triumph"
::===::
This was slated to be a very ranty, angry post but one good night's sleep later and... well, I'm still annoyed, but I'm also well-rested now.

So I need to cross-compile a Rust program. Specifically, [`rusty-engine`](https://github.com/opensight-cv/rusty-engine). Even though I'm
targeting the readily available Raspberry Pi, I can't just build on real hardware,
because - as simple as that would be in this case - OpenSight needs "trustworthy" builds,
so building on any old machine I have lying around doesn't cut it. It needs to be a
reproducible process.

This *should* be easy. Rust has spent a lot of time making cross-compilation simple. To thier credit, they have made this process a lot simpler than it would be for C or C++. 

Really, most of the annoyance here is thanks to Arch, not Rust.

> Wait, doesn't `rusty-engine` have a cross-compile process in place?

 Not a very good one. It currently uses [`cross`](https://github.com/rust-embedded/cross) to set up a Docker container that actually does the compiling. And thanks to (I assume) edge cases, this container is using QEMU to pretend to be an ARM processor. It's a slow, painful mess. Some of it can be sped up by creating the DEB package on the host system instead of in the container, but even then you're still containerizing something that can be and has been done before we started [gluing phones together for everything.](https://xkcd.com/1988/)

So what exactly do we need to do? We need to create an ARM build as "portably" as possible, preferably axing Docker and QEMU in the process.

I decided to try the most obvious approach - just use the cross-compiling built into cargo/rustc. I mean, it's *right there.* How hard can it really be?

The answer is very. It can be very hard.

## part 0 - the naive approach
Hey, why can't we just `cargo build --target whatever` and forget about it?

```
  = note: /usr/bin/ld: /home/caleb/Documents/FRC/rusty-engine/target/armv7-unknown-linux-gnueabihf/debug/deps/rusty_engine-867e3ef0e2d79a2b.10zm8wejy180c3j6.rcgu.o: relocations in generic ELF (EM: 40)
```

Oh.  
Turns out if you don't have Cargo set up with a toolchain for whatever target, it just goes and uses plain-ol' `ld` for some reason. Nice.

(If you're following along at home, you probably need to get the Rust parts of your ARM toolchain with e.g. `rustup target add armv7-unknown-linux-gnueabihf`.)

## part 1 - ~~installing~~ building the toolchain
OK, this is fine. I just need to install an ARM toolchain and point Cargo at it. Shouldn't be hard. Let's just [check the repos for GCC...](https://www.archlinux.org/packages/?q=gcc)

Are we KISS yet?  
Arch doesn't (at time of writing) package GCC for anything exept x86_64 targets and ARM 64 for some reason. ARM 64 binaries can run on a Raspberry Pi, but the Foundation hasn't gotten Raspbian to actually run in 64-bit mode "out of the box," and Travis was already providing real-hardware ARM 64 builds anyway.

Surely it's in the AUR. Everything is in the AUR.  
[Hey, look at that!](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc/) Wait, what's all this about stages?

GCC builds in a three-stage bootstrapping process. tavianator has managed to use this bootstrapping for a cross-compiler, despite [the gcc docs](https://gcc.gnu.org/install/build.html) claiming that is <q>not generally possible.</q> This means my AUR helper of choice, i.e. `yay`, chokes on this package. So I need to install, in order, the following:

1. `arm-linux-gnueabihf-binutils`
2. `arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc-stage1`
3. `arm-linux-gnueabihf-linux-api-headers`
4. `arm-linux-gnueabihf-glibc-headers`
5. `arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc-stage2`
6. `arm-linux-gnueabihf-glibc`
7. `arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc`

 At this point, I'm considering moving to Kubuntu. Seriously, this takes multiple hours with all four cores working full steam ahead and no other load. After subtracting a few years from my hardware's overall lifespan, I get a cross-compiling toolchain in place. Cool, now we just point Cargo to it:

```toml
# in .cargo/config
[target.armv7-unknown-linux-gnueabihf]
linker = "arm-linux-gnueabihf-gcc"
```

## part 2 - haha cross-compiler go brr
Moment of truth.

```sh
cargo build --target armv7-unknown-linux-gnueabihf
```

```
  = note: /usr/bin/arm-linux-gnueabihf-ld: cannot find -lgstrtspserver-1.0
          /usr/bin/arm-linux-gnueabihf-ld: cannot find -lgstbase-1.0
          /usr/bin/arm-linux-gnueabihf-ld: cannot find -lgstreamer-1.0
          /usr/bin/arm-linux-gnueabihf-ld: cannot find -lgobject-2.0
          /usr/bin/arm-linux-gnueabihf-ld: cannot find -lglib-2.0
          /usr/bin/arm-linux-gnueabihf-ld: cannot find -lgstrtsp-1.0
          [snip, these are repeated a few times]
```

## part 3 - acceptance
At this point, Arch is no longer usable for this endeavour. On, for instance, a Debian system, I'd probably be able to fetch ARM packages and set up my toolchain accordingly. Then I'd have to test the result image on real hardware before scripting the entire process (hopefully to the point that it could be made part of CI/CD). Unfortunately, it's finals week and I don't have a Debian box running at the moment. So for now, cross lives another day... until I come back with a bigger wrench.
