title = 'cross compiling rusty code - episode 2'
subtitle = 'attack of the containers'
tags = ['rust', 'arm', 'raspberry pi', 'cross compiler']
date = 2020-05-06
::===::
## a quick recap
Reading [episode 1](https://c-x-berger.github.io/blog/2020-05-04.html) is your best bet, but in summary:

* The brain-dead approach of simply invoking cargo build --target whatever doesn't work without configuration, since Cargo defaults to using whatever it can find for a linker, normally `/usr/bin/ld`.
* The less dumb approach of getting an ARM toolchain - at the expense of my processor's lifespan because <q>Arch Linux is a Simple Distribution</q> - and pointing Cargo to it doesn't go much further. While Cargo correctly invokes the ARM linker, said linker has no idea where to find all the C libraries we need to link to.

## wait, how did we get here?
As in, why am I rewriting this bit of tooling anyway?

So `rusty-engine` uses [`cross`](https://github.com/rust-embedded/cross) to do cross-compiling. The thinking behind `cross`, it seems, is to do the work of cross-compiling within a container to keep the host system clear of weird packages from other architectures. What exactly needs to be available in this container is... unclear. The images used by default all have some basic development tools available, as well as QEMU for <q>cross-testing</q> (testing on other architectures, i.e. something you'll probably only have to worry about with Unsafe Rust.)

Weirdly, it seems installing Rust itself into these containers is optional.

For some time, `rusty-engine` derived its Docker image for cross-compiling from [`arm32v7/debian`.](https://hub.docker.com/r/arm32v7/debian/) This meant that when cross performed cross-compilation within Docker, it was basically on an emulated ARM chip, slowing compile times to an absolute crawl.

### why not be `FROM rustembedded/cross`?
Because the `rustembedded/cross` image for ARM32v7 is based on Ubuntu 16, which is bearing on four years old and at the time the cross-compiling setup was initially created, seemed to have some disagreements with the GStreamer libraries we required. It seems this issue has been alleviated, and using `FROM rustembedded/cross:arm32v7-unknown-linux-gnueabihf` is probably viable now.

## so... what now?
I decided to remake the Dockerfile from scratch. It was a slow, esoteric knot in the build pipeline in dire need of TLC. There would be a singular focus on compiling the main executable, we would not be installing `cargo-deb` within the container when a DEB file is a fancy tarball that can be created on the host system.

Ultimately, the approach that was committed was the result of reading over `cross`' own Dockerfile, and tearing out anything I didn't need. Here I feel compelled to mention that these images build CMake and QEMU from source, though thankfully that bit of work isn't fronted to the user when deriving a new image `FROM` published ones.

Anyway, we're not starting `FROM` a rustembedded image, mostly because we're not very smart and didn't bother to see if our dependency issue has gone away or not.

Following along these images is a bit difficult. Do I need `xargo`? QEMU? CMake? Rust? No documentation answers me, and I am left making guesses. The README mentions QEMU issues causing single-threaded testing, so OK, we can toss that out. What about CMake? Well, we're not compiling any C code ourselves... just linking to it. Alright, out it goes. Not sure why the cross team put dropbear in these images, but it's included for some reason. And I'd *love* to know what on Earth is going on in `linux-image.sh`. Out with them both, hope nothing breaks I guess. `linux-runner` looks like more QEMU, out it goes.

Since we're starting from a clean Ubuntu image, we do need to add the armhf architecture and ports repo to the image. We can actually learn from `cross` here, as the script that adds the ports repos to sources.list at least states what the magic sed commands are up to.

## `cross build`
Cool, we have a Dockerfile now. Time to `cross build` and open the ~~champagne~~ fizzy drinks, right?

```
error: failed to run custom build command for `glib-sys v0.9.1`

Caused by:
  process didn't exit successfully: `/target/release/build/glib-sys-aed4f81425037da3/build-script-build` (exit code: 1)
--- stderr
Cross compilation detected. Use PKG_CONFIG_ALLOW_CROSS=1 to override
```
Oh.

Alright wise guy, yes I'm trying to cross-compile. Now let me do it.

```
error: failed to run custom build command for `glib-sys v0.9.1`

Caused by:
  process didn't exit successfully: `/target/release/build/glib-sys-aed4f81425037da3/build-script-build` (exit code: 1)
--- stderr
`"pkg-config" "--libs" "--cflags" "glib-2.0" "glib-2.0 >= 2.42"` did not exit successfully: exit code: 1
--- stderr
Package glib-2.0 was not found in the pkg-config search path.
Perhaps you should add the directory containing `glib-2.0.pc'
to the PKG_CONFIG_PATH environment variable
No package 'glib-2.0' found
```

Smart enough to detect a cross compile, not smart enough to meaningfully act on it. Good! Good, good, yes yes yes. One browse through the file list later, and we can see where the relevant `.pc` files are hiding (`/usr/lib/arm-linux-gnueabihf/pkgconfig`), tell `pkg-config` to look there because it's too much of a coward to do that itself, rebuild the image and hopefully third time's a charm.

```
Finished release [optimized] target(s) in 3m 04s
```
Hallelujah.

## closing time
I loaded the resulting binary onto Real Hardware, and everything seems to be working well. All the GStreamer libraries are dynamically linked anyway, so it's not terribly surprising.

Also, Steven might be rendering my work obselete:

```
<steven | 1189 | Project Manager> today we will switch to arm64
<steven | 1189 | Project Manager> sorry @c-x-berger | alum | wizard, shouldve said that 2 days ago lul
```
So that's nice.

Maybe the real cross-compilation was the rants we made along the way.
